
### What is DOM ?

- The **DOM** is a programming interface used by web browsers to represent and interact with HTML and XML documents.
- When a web page loads, the browser parses(analyze and interpret) the HTML and creates a structured, hierarchical tree of objects known as the DOM. Each HTML element is a node in this tree.
- This structure represents all elements, attributes, and content of the page, allowing scripts (like JavaScript) to dynamically access and modify its content, structure, and style.
- Any change to the DOM forces the browser to re-render the page, which can be slow when dealing with frequent updates.


### How the virtual DOM works

1. **Initial Rendering**:
    
    When the app starts, the entire UI is represented as a Virtual DOM. React elements are created and rendered into the virtual structure.
    
2. **State and Props Changes**:
3. 
    
    As the states and props change in the app, React re-renders the affected components in the virtual DOM. These changes do not immediately impact the real DOM.
    
3. **Comparison Using Diff Algorithm**:
    
    React then uses a **diffing algorithm** to compare the current version of the Virtual DOM with the previous version. This process identifies the differences (or "diffs") between the two versions.
    
4. **Reconciliation Process**:
    
    Based on the differences identified, React determines the most efficient way to update the real DOM. Only the parts of the real DOM that need to be updated are changed, rather than re-rendering the entire UI. This selective updating is quick and performant.
    
5. **Update to the Real DOM**:
    
    Finally, React applies the necessary changes to the real DOM. This might involve adding, removing, or updating elements based on the differences detected in step 3.
### Virtual DOM vs Real DOM vs Fiber

```jsx
main.jsx

ReactDOM.createRoot(document.getElementById('root')).render(
  <React.StrictMode>
    <App />
  </React.StrictMode>
);
```

The createRoot function creates a virtual DOM structure similar to the browser DOM.

#### **`Why do we need this?`**

- The reason is to compare the main DOM with the Virtual DOM created by the `createRoot` function.
- By doing so, React can update only the UI where changes have been made, avoiding a complete DOM removal and repaint, which reloads the entire page.

#### `Problem`

Consider a scenario where an element relies on network data, such as a button text that updates based on network responses. If multiple responses are received which can cause UI to updated, it can lead to multiple renders of the component.

#### **`How can we optimize this problem?`**

One solution is to introduce a delay before updating the UI. By waiting a few seconds, we increase the chances of avoiding intermediate updates caused by rapid network calls and only perform the update with the latest data received from the network request.

For example : Consider a situation where 5 network calls are initiated. Now instead of displaying data one by one from each network call, why don’t we consider only the latest network call and ignore all previous calls. This is the working principle of React Fiber.

```jsx
COUNTER APP

// CASE 1: 

const handleIncrease = () => {
    setCounter(counter + 1)
    setCounter(counter + 1)
    setCounter(counter + 1)
    setCounter(counter + 1)
    console.log("value of counter : " , counter);
  }
  
  react will execute setCounter only once and ignore the rest.
  
  
// CASE 2:

	const handleIncrease = () => {
		setCounter((prev) => prev + 1);
		setCounter((prev) => prev + 1);
		setCounter((prev) => prev + 1);
		setCounter((prev) => prev + 1);
		console.log("value of counter : ", counter);
	};
	
	
	react will execute all the setCounter functions because they all are unique.
	( the value of prev is different in all the lines)
```

#### **`What is Reconciliation?`**

- Reconciliation is the algorithm React uses to differentiate one tree with another to determine which parts need to be changed.
- Reconciliation is the algorithm that implements virtual dom.

#### `React Fiber`

React employs the Fiber algorithm to update the virtual DOM. The primary goal of React Fiber is to enhance its suitability for areas like animation, layout, and gestures. Its headline feature is incremental rendering, allowing the splitting of rendering work into chunks spread across multiple frames.

Key features of React Fiber include the ability to pause, abort, or reuse work as new updates arrive, prioritization of different types of updates, and new concurrency primitives.

#### `Key Features of fiber`

- pause work and come back to it later.
- assign priority to different types of work.
- reuse previously completed work.
- abort work if it’s no longer needed.

#### Virtual DOM vs Real DOM

**`Virtual DOM`**

- The virtual DOM is an in-memory representation of the real DOM elements.
- React uses a **diff algorithm** to compare the current and previous versions of updates to the DOM.
- It only re-renders the parts of the UI that have changed, instead of the whole thing.

**`DOM`**

- The real DOM is a built-in standard interface in browsers that represents and interacts with HTML elements, from `Doctype` declaration and the root `html` element to every other element in it.
- This real DOM represents the whole HTML document as a tree structure and allows JavaScript to manipulate and change HTML documents. Sometimes when those changes occur, the whole document might re-render.
### Asynchronous nature of react states.

#### Asynchronous Behavior of `useState`

- React's state updates are **asynchronous** because React batches multiple state updates together to optimize performance.
- This means that when you update a state using `setState` (such as `setCount` in your code), the update does not happen immediately.
- Instead, React schedules the update to happen later, typically after the component's event handler ( `handleChange()` ) has completed.

```jsx
const handleClick = () => {
    setCount(count + 1);
    console.log(count); 
};

// This will still log the previous value, not the updated one.
// The state will be updated after executing handleClick fn.
```

- In this example, even though `setCount(count + 1)` updates the state, `console.log(count)` will still log the previous value of `count`.
- This happens because `setCount` schedules the state update, but the state isn't updated immediately.
- React will only update the state after the event handler (`handleClick`) finishes, and after a re-render occurs.

#### Why State Updates Are Asynchronous ?

- `Performance Optimization:` React often needs to handle many state updates at once (for example, from user interactions or lifecycle methods). Instead of processing each state change immediately, React batches them together to minimize re-renders and optimize performance.
- `Reconciliation and Re-renders:` After state updates are batched, React triggers a process called "reconciliation" where it calculates the differences between the current UI and the new one based on the updated state. Then, React efficiently re-renders only the parts of the UI that need to change. This process happens asynchronously, so that React can handle large amounts of updates without blocking the UI.

#### How to Work with Asynchronous State Updates ?

To work with state updates in React, you can use the **`functional form`** of `setState`, which allows you to access the previous state and ensures you're working with the most up-to-date state.

#### Example

```jsx
const handleClick = () => {
   setCount(count + 1);
   console.log(count);   // does not logs the updated value
};

// using functional  form of setCount 

	const handleClick = () => {
		setCount((prev) => {
      const newState = prev + 1; 
      console.log(newState);   
      // performing the operation with the new state
      return (newState)  // updating the new state
		});
	};
```